new RFC: 58/RLN-V2 (#582)
vacp2p/rfc: content/docs/rfcs/58/README.md

---
slug: 58
title: 58/RLN-V2
name: Rate Limit Nullifier V2

> status: draft

Reviewer: ```suggestion
status: raw
```

RFCs must start in raw state. See [COSS](https://rfc.vac.dev/spec/1/).
You can also have a look at the RFC template in this repo for reference :).

Reviewer 2: Yes, This should be in `raw`

editor: Rasul Ibragimov <curryrasul@gmail.com>
contributors: 
- Lev Soukhanov <0xdeadfae@gmail.com>
---

# Abstract

> The `58/RLN-V2` protocol is improvement of `32/RLN-V1`, being more general construct, that allows to set various limits for an epoch (it's 1 message per epoch in `32/RLN-V1`) while remaining almost as simple as it predecessor. Moreover, it allows to set different rate-limits for different RLN app users based on some public data, e.g. stake or reputation.

Reviewer 3: For RFC we recommend using semantic line break https://rfc.vac.dev/spec/1/#conventions

It makes git usage easier.

# Motivation

> The main goal of `58/RLN-V2` is to generalize `32/RLN-V1` and expand its applications. There are two different subprotocols based on this protocol:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The main goal of `58/RLN-V2` is to generalize `32/RLN-V1` and expand its applications. 
There are two different sub-protocols based on this protocol:
```

* RLN-Same - RLN with the same rate-limit for different users;

> * RLN-Diff - RLN that allows to set different rate-limits for different users.

Reviewer 2: Maybe we can come up with different names for these sub-protocols?

Reviewer 2: Additionally,
```suggestion
* RLN-Same - RLN with the same rate-limit for all users;
* RLN-Diff - RLN that allows to set different rate-limits for different users.
```

> It is important to note that by using large values ​​of N, users will be able to remain anonymous, because their `internal_nullifiers` will not be repeated until they exceed the limit.

Reviewer 2: N hasn't been described yet here. Can we move this to the section where N is defined?

# Flow

> As in `32/RLN-V1`, the general flow can be described by the three steps:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As in `32/RLN-V1`, the general flow can be described by three steps:
```

1. Registration
2. Signaling
3. Verification and slashing

> As noted above, there are two subprotocols (RLN-Same and RLN-Diff) at the moment and their flow may be slightly different, so the it will be described below in subsections.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The two sub-protocols have different flows, and hence are defined separately.
```

## Important note

> All terms and parameters used remain the same as in `32/RLN-V1`, more details [here](https://rfc.vac.dev/spec/32/#technical-overview)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All terms and parameters used remain the same as in `32/RLN-V1`, more details [here](/spec/32/#technical-overview)
```

Typically, relative links are used in specs.

> All terms and parameters used remain the same as in `32/RLN-V1`, more details [here](https://rfc.vac.dev/spec/32/#technical-overview)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
All terms and parameters used remain the same as in [32/RLN-V1](spec/32/#technical-overview)
```

## Registration

The registration process in the RLN-Same subprotocol does not differ from `32/RLN-V1`, but there are differences in the construction of the RLN-Diff **identity**. These differences will be described below.

> ### RLN-Diff registration

Reviewer 2: I think it may be better to split out the sub-protocols flows entirely, i.e
```
# Flow
## Rln Diff Flow

## Rln Same Flow
```
This way it isn't confusing when read in sequence

> **Identity** in `32/RLN-V1` is equal to `poseidonHash(identity_secret)`. The goal of RLN-Diff is to set different rate-limits for different users; it follows that **identity** must somehow depend on the `user_message_limit` parameter, where 0 <= `user_message_limit` <= `message_limit`. There are few ways to do that:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**id_commitment** in [32/RLN-V1](/spec/32), the `id_commitment` is equal to `poseidonHash(identity_secret_hash)`. 
The goal of RLN-Diff is to set different rate-limits for different users.
It follows that **id_commitment** must somehow depend on the `user_message_limit` parameter, where 0 <= `user_message_limit` <= `message_limit`. 
There are few ways to do that:
```

1. Sending `identity_secret_hash` = `poseidonHash(identity_secret, userMessageLimit)` and zk proof that `user_message_limit` is valid (is in the right range). This approach requires zkSNARK verification, which is an expensive operation on the blockchain.

> 2. Sending the same `identity_secret_hash` as in `32/RLN-V1` (`poseidonHash(identity_secret)`) and a user_message_limit publicly to a server or smart-contract where `rate_commitment` = `poseidonHash(identity_secret_hash, userMessageLimit)` will be calculated. Then it is the rate_commitments of the users that will be the leaves in the membership Merkle tree. This approach requires additional hashing in the Circuit, but it eliminates the need for zk proof verification for the registration.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. Sending the same `identity_secret_hash` as in `32/RLN-V1` (`poseidonHash(identity_secret)`) and a user_message_limit publicly to a server or smart-contract where `rate_commitment` = `poseidonHash(identity_secret_hash, userMessageLimit)` is calculated. 
The leaves in the membership Merkle tree would be the rate_commitments of the users. 
This approach requires additional hashing in the Circuit, but it eliminates the need for zk proof verification for the registration.
```

> In general, both methods are correct, and the choice of one method or another is left to the creator of the RLN application. At the same time, it's recommended to use second method for the reasons already described. The following flow description will also be based on the second method.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Both methods are correct, and the choice of the method is left to the implementer. 
It is recommended to use second method for the reasons already described.
The following flow description will also be based on the second method.
```

## Signalling

> In general, the signaling of this protocol works the same as `32/RLN-V1`; but due to the new design, the proof generation scheme is changed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In general, the signalling of this protocol works the same as [32/RLN-V1](/spec/32), but due to the new design, the proof generation scheme has changed.
```

### RLN-Same signalling

#### Proof generation

> For proof generation, the user need to submit the following fields to the circuit:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For proof generation, the user needs to submit the following fields to the circuit:
```

```
{
    identity_secret: identity_secret_hash,
    path_elements: Merkle_proof.path_elements,
    identity_path_index: Merkle_proof.indices,
    x: signal_hash,
    message_id: message_id,
    external_nullifier: external_nullifier,
    message_limit: message_limit
}
```

#### Calculating output

The following fields are needed for proof output calculation:

```
{
    identity_secret_hash: bigint, 
    external_nullifier: bigint,
    message_id: bigint,
    x: bigint, 
}
```

The output `[y, internal_nullifier]` is calculated in the following way:

```
a_0 = identity_secret_hash
a_1 = poseidonHash([a0, external_nullifier, message_id])

y = a_0 + x * a_1

internal_nullifier = poseidonHash([a_1])
```

### RLN-Diff signalling

#### Proof generation

For proof generation, the user need to submit the following fields to the circuit:

```
{
    identity_secret: identity_secret_hash,
    path_elements: Merkle_proof.path_elements,
    identity_path_index: Merkle_proof.indices,
    x: signal_hash,
    message_id: message_id,
    external_nullifier: external_nullifier,
    user_message_limit: message_limit
}
```

#### Calculating output

> Output is calculated the same as for the RLN-Same subprotocol.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Output is calculated in the same way as the RLN-Same sub-protocol```

## Verification and slashing

> Verification and slashing remains the same as in `32/RLN-V1`. The only difference that may arise is the `message_limit` check in the RLN-Same, since it is now a public input of the Circuit.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Verification and slashing remains the same as in [32/RLN-V1](/spec/32). 
The only difference that may arise is the `message_limit` check in the RLN-Same, since it is now a public input of the Circuit.
```

## ZK Circuits specification

> The design of the `32/RLN-V1` circuits is different from the circuits of this protocol. Both RLN-Same and RLN-Diff require additional algebraic constraints.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The design of the [32/RLN-V1](/spec/32) circuits is different from the circuits of this protocol. 
RLN-v2 requires additional algebraic constraints.
```

> The membership proof and Shamir's Secret Sharing constraints remained unchanged.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The membership proof and Shamir's Secret Sharing constraints remain unchanged.
```

### RLN-Same circuit

#### Circuit parameters

**Public Inputs**
- `x`
- `external_nullifier`
- `message_limit` - limit per epoch

**Private Inputs**
- `identity_secret_hash`
- `path_elements` 
- `identity_path_index`
- `message_id`

**Outputs**
- `y`
- `root`
- `internal_nullifier`

### RLN-Diff circuit

In the RLN-Diff scheme, instead of the public parameter `message_limit`, a parameter is used that is set for each user during registration (`user_message_limit`); the `message_id` value is compared to it in the same way as it is compared to `message_limit` in the case of RLN-Same.

#### Circuit parameters

**Public Inputs**
- `x`
- `external_nullifier`

**Private Inputs**
- `identity_secret_hash`
- `path_elements`
- `identity_path_index`
- `message_id`
- `user_message_limit`

**Outputs**
- `y`
- `root`
- `internal_nullifier`

# Appendix A: Security considerations

> Although the described protocol differs from `32/RLN-V1`, the security level remains the same. Recommendations given in https://rfc.vac.dev/spec/32/#appendix-a-security-considerations can also be used here.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# Security considerations

Although there are changes in the circuits, this spec inherits all the security considerations of [32/RLN-V1](/spec/32).
```

---
slug: 58
title: 58/RLN-V2
name: Rate Limit Nullifier V2
status: raw
editor: Rasul Ibragimov <curryrasul@gmail.com>
contributors: 
- Lev Soukhanov <0xdeadfae@gmail.com>
---

# Abstract

> The described protocol is improvement of [32/RLN-V1](/spec/32), being more general construct, that allows to set various limits for an epoch (it's 1 message per epoch in [32/RLN-V1](/spec/32)) while remaining almost as simple as it predecessor. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The protocol specified in this document is an improvement of [32/RLN-V1](/spec/32), being more general construct, that allows to set various limits for an epoch (it's 1 message per epoch in [32/RLN-V1](/spec/32)) while remaining almost as simple as it predecessor. 
```

Moreover, it allows to set different rate-limits for different RLN app users based on some public data, e.g. stake or reputation.

# Motivation

The main goal of this RFC is to generalize [32/RLN-V1](/spec/32) and expand its applications. 
There are two different subprotocols based on this protocol:
* RLN-Same - RLN with the same rate-limit for all users;
* RLN-Diff - RLN that allows to set different rate-limits for different users.

> It is important to note that by using large epoch limit value, users will be able to remain anonymous, because their `internal_nullifiers` will not be repeated until they exceed the limit.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is important to note that by using a large epoch limit value, users will be able to remain anonymous, because their `internal_nullifiers` will not be repeated until they exceed the limit.
```

The leaves in the membership Merkle tree would be the rate_commitments of the users. 
This approach requires additional hashing in the Circuit, but it eliminates the need for zk proof verification for the registration.

Both methods are correct, and the choice of the method is left to the implementer. 
It is recommended to use second method for the reasons already described.
The following flow description will also be based on the second method.

### Signalling

#### Proof generation

For proof generation, the user need to submit the following fields to the circuit:

```
{
    identity_secret: identity_secret_hash,
    path_elements: Merkle_proof.path_elements,
    identity_path_index: Merkle_proof.indices,
    x: signal_hash,
    message_id: message_id,
    external_nullifier: external_nullifier,
    user_message_limit: message_limit
}
```

#### Calculating output

The Output is calculated in the same way as the RLN-Same sub-protocol.

## Verification and slashing

Verification and slashing in both subprotocols remain the same as in [32/RLN-V1](/spec/32).

> The only difference that may arise is the `message_limit` check in the RLN-Same, since it is now a public input of the Circuit.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The only difference that may arise is the `message_limit` check in RLN-Same, since it is now a public input of the Circuit.
```
